Translator: Ilze Garda
Reviewer: Rhonda Jacobs
Imagine a parallel universe
that coexists in the same place
as our universe,
in the same space, at the same time.
This universe is overcrowded
with life forms.
It is invisible and intangible
like the finest layer of reality,
which we cannot notice.
But it is there,
and it maintains the functionality
of our everyday world.
Without it, we just wouldn't exist.
Now, would you be surprised
if I told you that actually everything
I said before is true?
Because I'm about to tell you this.
I'm talking about the world of microbes -
a separate world,
yet so deeply connected to us.
And the story of this connection
expands far away into the past.
But thanks to modern science,
we are now able to read this story
like a history book.
Ladies and gentlemen,
I proudly present biomolecular archeology,
the science behind this history book.
And I am here to share with you
what fascinating things
we can try to manage
with this powerful modern science.
But let's start with the term itself:
biomolecular archeology.
It's not even easy to pronounce,
not to mention to try to understand
the essence of this phrase.
There might not be a problem
with the archeology part, right?
We've all seen it in movies,
we know what it is about,
but what is "biomolecular" anyway?
The first thing that comes to mind:
it is something about biology
and molecules.
And this is actually correct.
A biological molecule, or a biomolecule,
is any molecule that is present
in a living organism.
Now, there are all sorts
of molecules in your body,
but undoubtedly,
the most informative one is DNA.
So, let's bring it back together.
Biomolecular archeology
enables us to study the DNA
recovered from archeological samples.
And not only native human DNA,
which, of course, all by itself
gives lots of study perspectives,
but also the DNA of microbes
that lived side by side with that human.
This science is relatively young.
About ten years ago,
a massive breakthrough happened
in genomic research technology.
A method appeared which is called NGS,
next generation sequencing,
and this method significantly cuts
time and costs of any genomic research.
For example, have you ever heard
about the Human Genome Project?
It was quite a popular topic
for science fiction some time ago.
This project launched in 1990
with the goal to decrypt
all genomic information
in a human organism.
At that time,
with the technology of the time,
it took ten years
and three billion dollars
to reach the goals of this project.
With NGS,
all of that can be done in just one day
at the cost of 15,000 dollars.
On the fertile soil
of next generation sequencing
arose biomolecular archeology
because there is a great lot
of genomic information to be analyzed
and it just wouldn't be possible
to manage such research
with olden day technology.
Now we are able
to manage such research OK,
"But why?" you could ask me.
"What benefits can we get
out of this information?
What can we use it for?"
The answer appears to be quite wide.
Consider human health
as a complex and dynamic system.
Apart from genetically determined factors
that are stored in our DNA,
our health is severely influenced
by many other factors,
like our lifestyle, our diet,
and our fellow microbes.
One hundred trillion cells,
one and 14 zeros,
that's the approximate number
of microorganisms in your body,
ten times greater
than the number of your own cells.
Your microbial baggage occupies
almost 2% of your body weight,
that's about one and a half kilograms,
approximately the weight of your liver.
Or your brain.
And all these are microbes.
Just think about it for a second!
Human microbiome, that's the modern term
for all microbial communities
inhabiting your body,
has earned a close attention
over the last decade.
It seems that we are only beginning
to discover the mysterious role
that is given to microbes
in the performance of our health.
In 2007, the National Institutes
of Health of the U.S.
launched the Human Microbiome Project
to finally study its relation
to our health conditions.
And since then,
it has only become clearer
that our notion about our fellow microbes
is inexcusably poor.
Francis Collins, the director
of the National Institutes of Health,
even compared the researchers
involved in the project
with the 15th century explorers
discovering the outline
of a new continent.
It is now being suggested
that a range of modern,
widespread diseases,
starting from obesity, Crohn's disease,
other gastrointestinal problems
to all sorts of allergies,
autoimmune diseases,
or maybe even cancer,
may appear to be consequences
of microbiome changes.
But where do these changes come from?
When did they first appear?
What was the triggering factor?
These are the questions we are trying
to find answers to at the moment.
This topic always triggers a memory
of my first conscious experience
with the microbial world around.
My mother, like any attentive parent,
tried her best to warn me
against the invisible dangers
of the world,
and she told me a story
that every time I do not wash hands
before eating something,
I become a reason
of global microbial migration.
(Laughter)
An uncountable number
of microbial families
come together, pack their suitcases,
their TVs, their favorite toys,
and leave their houses forever
to move to a new area
which is thought to be my body.
Now, I was a child
with a very vivid imagination,
and this story influenced me so much
that I was obsessed with handwashing
for a really long time.
It actually took me years
to overcome the thought
that I'm doing something wrong
when I initiate this microbial migration,
and to understand finally
that they are actually willing to come,
they've got friends there
waiting for them.
I'm not trying to convince you
not to ever wash your hands again,
of course not.
But let's try to be moderate with it.
We lack this microbial diversity nowadays.
And as we know from ecology,
the most diverse systems
are the most stable ones.
This might be one of the reasons
for our so-called
diseases of civilization.
And this is exactly the type of hypothesis
for biomolecular archeology to deal with.
It turns out that there is
a unique archaeological material
that so preciously stores
the enormous amount of information
related to ancient human microbiome,
and this material
is ancient dental plaque,
thanks to the fact
that oral cavity hygiene
was not on the list of top priorities
for humans of the past.
Their oral microbiome has already been
partly fossilized during their lifetime
in the form of dental calculus,
which, in turn, stays in soil
as well preserved
as the skeletons themselves.
Sadly, we can't help these fellas anymore.
But they can help us by providing
unique and precious information
about their microbes and their health,
and maybe we will have a chance to help
others in the future thanks to them.
There is one more vast
human health-related aspect
where biomolecular archaeology
takes its rightful place,
and this field of research
expands into the valley
of ancient deadly pathogens.
It is true
that the vast majority of microbes
either provide us some kind of benefit
or do not really care
whether there is a human around.
But there are some ancient deadly microbes
that still remain an urgent problem
nowadays all around the world.
For example, Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
One and a half million deaths in 2014.
And OK, OK, I know,
the first reaction I always get is like,
"Wait, aren't there antibiotics?"
or "I heard there is even a vaccine;
is this disease still dangerous
to us after all?"
The answer is yes;
tuberculosis is closer than you think.
Because of some mysterious
genetic phenomenon,
there are people that can carry around
this microbe their entire lives
without developing any symptoms,
and there are people that develop symptoms
straight ahead after infection.
Let me give you a real example
of a tuberculosis microepidemic.
Let's say a person somehow got infected.
He works as a teacher in a junior school.
Half a year later,
one of his pupils develops symptoms.
A few months later,
the older sister of the pupil.
A few more months later,
two friends of the sister.
This is how it spreads.
When I was just starting
my research on this topic,
I myself was very surprised to know
that tuberculosis worldwide remains
one of the major health concerns,
that on the list of infectious diseases,
it is the second most common
death cause after HIV.
Yes, the fight continues.
Did you know we have a tuberculosis clinic
right here in Latvia, just outside Riga,
where many doctors and other specialists
fight tuberculosis on a daily basis?
To finally beat this harmful bacteria,
it is crucial to understand
how it evolved,
how it developed
resistance to antibiotics,
how it spread.
And these are the questions
where biomolecular archaeology
can help us a lot.
At the moment, working in the Latvian
Biomedical Research and Study Centre,
we have managed to identify
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
in one archaeological sample
from the 17th century.
We are now in the process
of defining its whole genome,
so we can understand
what type of tuberculosis reigned
at that time over the Latvian territories
and where it came from.
Obviously, biomolecular archaeology
impacts humanities as well,
such as history and anthropology.
These, for example, are the excavations
on the Saint Ģertrūdes Cemetery
a few years ago.
They started very spontaneously.
There was an idea to build
a shopping center in that area,
and there was also information
that there might be
some medieval burial sites.
So the Latvian Institute of History
received a request to check it out.
And they did actually find
a medieval burial site,
quite a massive one.
Our archaeologists
dug out over 500 skeletons,
and found 2,000 more skeletons
buried separately in a giant wooden box.
But what was it?
This couldn't be war because the skeletons
lacked war lesions on their bones.
Was it hunger? Epidemic?
Archaeology itself cannot take
this research any further,
we have to intervene
with biomolecular methods.
Only then can we trace the true reason.
The research process that implements
the goals of the science
is fascinating, even by itself.
It all starts with ancient bones and teeth
from cemeteries all around Latvia.
We then cut out
small pieces of these bones
and shred them in special scientific mills
to get bone powder.
We then extract all the DNA
that is captured in a specific
bone powder sample,
and then we sequence it.
Sequencing is the process
where the machine reads the DNA code
and translates it into a four-letter code.
By the way, it is absolutely fascinating
how all genetic information
of human beings
and all other living creatures
on the planet Earth
can be written down using the alphabet
containing four letters only.
It's absolutely not surprising
that the result of the sequencing
is absolutely unreadable -
gigabytes of text
consisting of these four letters.
It then takes time and effort
to analyze these data
with a variety of computational methods
and programming approaches.
And at the very end,
we get a pretty readable list
of all the microorganisms
from a specific sample.
The field of my research
contains three sciences at once:
archaeology, biology and computer science,
all mixed, merged and connected.
It's like the science itself
merging and connecting humanity
throughout centuries.
Science is like a pyramid:
you cannot lay the upper block
without a foundation
of the blocks beneath.
And building this pyramid of healthcare
throughout the entire human civilization,
I believe biomolecular archaeology
just opened up a new frontier for us.
Where do we go from here?
It's a question of choice,
but I believe that any destination
holds fascinating discoveries.
But just for now, please remember
that you are never alone.
(Laughter)
You've got a hundred trillion friends
that are always there for you.
Think about it next time
you want to wash your hands.
Thank you.
(Applause)